ANDI: Adaptive Norm-Distribution Interface
Vladimer Khasia
Independent Researcher
vladimer.khasia.1@gmail.com
December 13, 2025
Abstract
The optimization of deep neural networks is currently dominated by two paradigms: coordinate-
wise adaptive methods (e.g., AdamW), which ignore parameter correlations, and higher-order struc-
tural methods (e.g., K-FAC, Muon), which enforce geometric constraints but suffer from super-linear
computational complexity. We introduce theAdaptive Norm-Distribution Interface (ANDI),
a first-order optimizer that bridges this gap via structured preconditioning. ANDI applies an element-
wise equilibration transformation derived from the additive equilibration of row and column norms,
effectively approximating matrix balancing without iterative solvers or singular value decomposi-
tion. We prove that ANDI strictly maintains descent directions and provides an implicit trust
region bounded by the gradient energy. Empirically, ANDI matches the convergence of spectral
methods on ResNet-9 (CIFAR-10) while maintaining theO(N) computational profile of AdamW.
Furthermore, on Transformer-based causal language modeling (NanoGPT), ANDI outperforms both
diagonal and spectral baselines, suggesting that additive norm-equilibration serves as a superior in-
ductive bias for attention-based architectures. Finally, we demonstrate scalability to the8-billion
parameter regime by fine-tuning Llama-3, where ANDI exhibits rapid convergence within the
constrained optimization subspaces ofLow-Rank Adaptation (LoRA). The code is available at
https://github.com/VladimerKhasia/ANDI
1 Introduction
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and its adaptive variants, particularly Adam [7] and AdamW [9],
serve as the backbone of modern deep learning. These methods rely on diagonal preconditioning, scal-
ing updates based on coordinate-wise statistics. While computationally efficient (O(N)), diagonal pre-
conditioners treat the entries of weight matrices as independent variables, ignoring the rich structural
correlations inherent in linear layers and attention heads.
Recent advances in structural optimization, such as Shampoo [3] and the spectral optimizer Muon [6],
demonstrate that respecting the matrix geometry of gradients can significantly accelerate convergence.
However, these methods typically rely on expensive matrix factorizations or iterative orthogonalization
procedures (e.g., Newton-Schulz iterations), which introduce cubic complexityO(n3) with respect to
layer dimensions or substantial memory overheads.
This presents a fundamentalEfficiency-Structure Trade-off: can we capture the benefits of structured
preconditioning without incurring the computational cost of higher-order arithmetic?
Present Work.We propose ANDI (Adaptive Norm-Distribution Interface), a novel optimization al-
gorithm that achieves structural equilibration viaRank-1 Additive Normalization. Instead of forcing
singular values to unity (as in Muon) or estimating full covariance blocks (as in Shampoo), ANDI nor-
malizes gradient entries by the sum of their corresponding row and column norms. This operation acts
as a single-step additive approximation to Sinkhorn scaling [13], preventing individual neurons or feature
channels from dominating the update signal.
Our contributions are as follows:
1.Algorithm:We formulate ANDI, a parameter-free preconditioning step that runs inO(N) time
andO(1) auxiliary memory, making it strictly more efficient than spectral baselines.
2.Theory:We provide proofs of global descent guarantees and establish a theoretical bound on
element-wise update magnitudes, distinguishing ANDI from Newton-based methods that risk saddle-
point attraction.
1
3.Empirical Validation:We demonstrate that ANDI achieves Pareto-optimal performance across
vision and language tasks, outperforming AdamW in convergence speed and exceeding the state-
of-the-art version of Muon (D-Muon) in final loss on Transformer architectures.
2 Methodology
We introduce the Adaptive Norm-Distribution Interface (ANDI), a structured optimization algorithm
designed to equilibrate the flow of gradients through high-dimensional weight matrices without destroying
the sign structure of the descent direction. ANDI operates as a gradient preconditioner coupled with a
momentum-based update rule.
2.1 The ANDI Preconditioner
LetL(θ) denote the objective function with respect to parametersθ∈Rd. At time stept, letG t=
∇θL(θt) be the stochastic gradient. For parameters representing linear transformations (e.g., Linear or
Convolutional layers), we reshape the gradient into a matrix formG t∈Rm×n.
The ANDI preconditioner transformsG tinto a candidate update directionU tvia a two-stage process:
Additive EquilibrationandEnergy-Consistent Rescaling.
Additive Equilibration.Standard matrix balancing techniques (e.g., Sinkhorn-Knopp) seek diagonal
matricesD 1, D2such thatD 1GD 2is doubly stochastic. These iterative multiplicative updates are
computationally expensive. ANDI approximates this goal via a single-step additive normalization. We
define the row normsr∈Rmand column normsc∈Rnas:
ri=∥G i,:∥2, c j=∥G :,j∥2.(1)
We compute the equilibrated gradient bGelement-wise:
bGij=Gij
ri+cj+ϵ,(2)
whereϵis a small stability constant. This operation suppresses elements belonging to rows or columns
with high aggregate magnitude, penalizing ”heavy” features or neurons that dominate the gradient signal.
Energy-Consistent Rescaling.The equilibration step (2) alters the global magnitude of the update.
To maintain training stability and ensure the step size remains consistent with the original optimization
landscape, we apply a restoration scalarα. We define the target energyτbased on the original gradient
norm:
τ=q
∥G∥2
F+ 1.(3)
The scalarαis computed to map the equilibrated gradient magnitude to this target:
α=τ
∥bG∥F+ϵ.(4)
The final preconditioned gradient isH t=αbGt.
2.2 Update Rule
ANDI is integrated with Nesterov momentum. LetM tbe the momentum buffer,ηthe learning rate,
andµthe momentum coefficient. The update step is:
Mt+1←µM t+H t (5)
Vt+1←H t+µM t+1 (Nesterov correction) (6)
θt+1←θt−ηV t+1 (7)
3 Theoretical Analysis
In this section, we analyze the convergence properties and stability guarantees of ANDI. We define the
transformation Φ :Rm×n→Rm×nsuch thatH= Φ(G).
2
3.1 Descent Direction Guarantee
A critical requirement for any non-convex optimizer is that the update direction must maintain a positive
correlation with the negative gradient. Unlike Newton-based methods which can be attracted to saddle
points due to indefinite Hessians, or randomized orthogonalization methods which may rotate gradients
excessively, ANDI is strictly descent-preserving.
Proposition 1(Sign Preservation and Descent).For any non-zero gradientG∈Rm×n, the precondi-
tioned directionHsatisfies⟨G,H⟩>0.
Proof.RecallH=α bG. Expanding the inner product:
⟨G,H⟩=X
i,jGijHij=X
i,jGij
αGij
ri+cj
.(8)
Sinceα >0, normsr i, cj≥0, and assumingG̸=0(implying denominators are positive):
⟨G,H⟩=αX
i,jG2
ij
ri+cj.(9)
SinceG2
ij≥0 for alli, jand strictly positive for at least one entry, the sum is strictly positive. Thus,H
is a valid descent direction.
3.2 Implicit Trust Region and Stability
Standard adaptive methods (like Adam) bound updates by±1 (sign) or scale by moving averages. ANDI
provides a stricter structural bound on individual elements relative to their row/column context.
Proposition 2(Element-wise Boundedness).Let bGbe the equilibrated matrix defined in Eq. (2). For
any entry(i, j),| bGij| ≤1. Further, ifm, n >1,| bGij|<1for generic non-sparse gradients.
Proof.By definition,r i=pP
kG2
ik≥ |G ij|andc j=qP
kG2
kj≥ |G ij|.
|bGij|=|Gij|
ri+cj≤|Gij|
|Gij|+|G ij|=1
2.(10)
Even in the worst case where a row and column contain only zeros except for the intersectionG ij, the
denominator is 2|G ij|, bounding the value at 0.5. In practice, the denominator acts as a structural
regularizer, ensuring no single weight update can dominate the layer’s statistics.
3.3 Adaptive Regime Analysis
The scalarαintroduces a non-linear scaling dependent on the gradient magnitude∥G∥ F. We analyze
two limiting regimes:
Case 1: Vanishing Gradients (∥G∥ F→0).As∥G∥ F→0,τ→1. Consequently, the update
H≈1
∥bG∥FbG. This acts as a normalization mechanism, ensuring that even in regions of flat curvature
(plateaus), the optimizer takes steps of unit Frobenius norm, facilitating escape from local minima.
Case 2: Exploding Gradients (∥G∥ F→ ∞).As∥G∥ F→ ∞,τ≈ ∥G∥ F. Assuming the structure
ofGis stable,∥ bG∥Fconverges to a structural constantK. Thus,H≈∥G∥F
KbG. Here, ANDI behaves
linearly with respect to the gradient magnitude (similar to SGD), avoiding the over-aggressive step sizes
that pure normalization methods might suggest in high-curvature regions.
Remark 1.ANDI effectively interpolates between Normalized Gradient Descent (in low-gradient regimes)
and Structured SGD (in high-gradient regimes), providing an automatic trust-region adaptation without
explicit hyperparameter scheduling.
3
3.4 Homogeneous Embedding and Non-Vanishing Manifold Velocity
The energy-consistent restoration scalarτ=p
∥G∥2
F+ 1 corresponds to a projection from the Euclidean
gradient space onto a unit-hyperboloid manifoldHnembedded inRmn+1. Let ˜G= [vec(G); 1]∈Rmn+1
be an augmented representation.
The scaling byτensures that the optimizer maintains a non-zero lower bound on the update magni-
tude, preventing the ”stagnation” typical of first-order methods in quasi-flat regions (plateaus).
Proposition 3(Lower Bound on Update Energy).For anyG∈Rm×n, the norm of the preconditioned
updateHsatisfies:
∥H∥ F≥p
∥G∥2
F+ 1
∥bG∥F>0.(11)
As∥G∥ F→0, the update norm∥H∥ Fconverges to∥ bG∥−1
F, which is strictly positive for non-degenerate
G.
This property implies that ANDI effectively operates asNormalized Gradient Descent(NGD) in the
vanishing gradient limit. Unlike standard NGD, which is discontinuous at the origin, the ANDI operator
Φ(G) is a smooth map, as the +1 term acts as aC∞regularizer for the norm function.
3.5 Spectral Conditioning via Rank-1 Marginal Balancing
The choice of the additive denominatorD ij=ri+cjis theoretically grounded in the minimization of
the condition number of the weight update. It is a known result in numerical linear algebra [14] that
diagonal scalingD 1AD 2which equilibrates row and column norms minimizes the condition numberκ
within a factor of√nof the optimum.
ANDI’s additive equilibration acts as a first-order approximation to the Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm
[2]. By the AM-GM inequality,r i+cj≥2√ricj, establishing that ANDI’s additive scaling is a strictly
conservative majorant of the geometric mean scaling used in symmetric matrix balancing.
Proposition 4(Spectral Homogenization).Letσ max(H)be the spectral radius of the update. The
operatorΦacts as a contraction on the outlier singular values ofGby penalizing entries associated
with high-energy marginalsr i, cj. This effectively homogenizes the marginal distribution of the gradient
energy, acting as a proxy for second-order whitening without theO(n3)cost of Eigendecomposition or
Matrix Inversion.
3.6 Smoothness and Lipschitz Continuity of the Operator
To guarantee convergence in stochastic settings, the preconditioning operator must be Lipschitz contin-
uous. We define the ANDI transformation as Φ :Rm×n→Rm×n.
Proposition 5(Lipschitz Continuity).The operatorΦ(G)is Lipschitz continuous on any compact set
K⊂Rm×nwhere∥G∥ F>0.
Proof.The map Φ(G) =α(G)·(G⊘D(G)) is a composition of differentiable functions. The denominator
Dij=ri+cj+ϵis bounded away from zero byϵ. The scalarα(G) involves the Frobenius norm, which
is differentiable everywhere except at the origin; however, the termp
∥G∥2
F+ 1 is differentiable for all
G. Since the partial derivatives of Φ are bounded onK, the operator isL-Lipschitz.
This result is fundamental for stability: it ensures that small perturbations in the stochastic gradient
(noise) do not lead to disproportionately large jumps in the preconditioned update, a common failure
mode in strictly interpolating or higher-order optimizers.
4 Algorithm Specification
We formally present the proposed method in Algorithm 1. The procedure distinguishes between tensors
that allow for structural equilibration (matrices exceeding a minimal dimension thresholdδ) and lower-
dimensional parameters (vectors or small matrices) which undergo only global energy normalization.
4
Algorithm 1:Adaptive Norm-Distribution Interface (ANDI)
1Input:Parametersθ 0, Learning rateη, Momentumµ, Weight Decayλ, Dimension Thresholdδ,
Stabilityϵ= 10−8.
2Initialize:Momentum bufferM 0←0.
3fort= 1. . . Tdo
4Compute Gradients: G t← ∇ θL(θt−1) ;
5foreach parameter tensorg∈G tdo
// Step 0: Decoupled Weight Decay
6θ[g]←(1−λη)·θ[g] ;
// Compute norms and target energy
7ν← ∥g∥ F;
8τ←√
ν2+ 1 ;
9Let (d 1, . . . , d k) be dimensions ofg.
10ifk >1then
// Matricization: Flatten dims2. . . k
11G mat←Reshape(g,(d 1,Qk
i=2di)) ;
12(m, n)←shape(G mat) ;
// Check dimensions against threshold
13ifm≥δandn≥δthen
// Structural Equilibration
14r← ∥G(i,:)
mat∥2+ϵ;
15c← ∥G(:,j)
mat∥2+ϵ;
// Broadcasting Addition
16D ij←ri+cj;
17 bg←G mat⊘D;
// Rescale and Restore Shape
18α←τ/(∥ bg∥F+ϵ) ;
19g final←(α·bg).view(d 1, . . . , d k) ;
20else
21g final←g·(τ/(ν+ϵ)) ;
22end
23else
// Global Normalization (Vectors)
24g final←g·(τ/(ν+ϵ)) ;
25end
// Nesterov Momentum Update
26m buf←M t−1[g] ;
27m new←µ·m buf+gfinal ;
28ifNesterovthen
29u←g final +µ·m new;
30else
31u←m new;
32end
// Parameter Step
33θ t[g]←θ t−1[g]−η·u;
34M t[g]←m new;
35end
36end
5 Computational Complexity and Guarantees
We analyze the asymptotic time complexity of ANDI per optimization step relative to standard baselines
(AdamW) and spectral methods (Muon). LetW∈Rm×ndenote a weight matrix parameter. Let
N=m×nbe the total number of elements.
5
5.1 ANDI Complexity
The computational cost of ANDI is dominated by the calculation of row and column norms and the
element-wise division.
1.Norm Reduction:Calculatingrrequires summing squares along rows, a reduction operation of
O(N). Similarly, calculatingcisO(N).
2.Broadcasting and Division:ComputingD ij=ri+cjand the subsequent divisionG ij/Dij
involvesO(1) operations per element, totalingO(N).
3.Global Scaling:Frobenius norms and scalar multiplications areO(N).
Thus, the total time complexity per step is:
TANDI∈ O(N) =O(mn).(12)
Crucially, ANDI relies only on element-wise and reduction operations, making it **memory-bandwidth
bound** rather than compute bound, similar to SGD.
5.2 Baseline Comparisons
AdamW.AdamW maintains two moment estimates (mean and variance). It performs element-wise
squaring, square roots, and division.
TAdamW ∈ O(N).(13)
ANDI shares the same linear asymptotic complexity class as AdamW. However, ANDI requires fewer
read/write operations on state tensors (it tracks only momentum, whereas Adam tracks momentum and
variance), potentially reducing memory footprint by factor of 1.5×relative to Adam.
Muon (Newton-Schulz).Muon relies on the Newton-Schulz iteration to approximate matrix square
roots. For a matrixG∈Rm×n(assumingm≤n), the dominant operation is Matrix-Matrix Multiplica-
tion (MMM). The standard Newton-Schulz iteration involves computingA=XXTandBX, which are
operations of orderO(m2n). IfKis the number of Newton-Schulz steps (typicallyK= 5):
TMuon∈ O(K·m2n).(14)
In the case of square matrices wherem≈n, Muon exhibits cubic complexityO(n3), whereas ANDI
remains quadraticO(n2) (linear in the number of parameters).
5.3 Summary of Guarantees
Table 1 summarizes the theoretical properties. ANDI occupies a distinct pareto-optimal point: it offers
structured preconditioning (utilizing the matrix geometry) while maintaining theO(N) cost profile of
coordinate-wise methods.
Table 1: Comparison of Optimization Algorithms per Step
Algorithm Complexity Preconditioning State Memory
SGDO(N) None 1×(Momentum)
AdamWO(N) Diagonal (Coordinate-wise) 2×(Mom + Var)
MuonO(Km2n) Spectral (SVD-approx) 1×(Momentum)
ANDI (Ours)O(N)Rank-1 Additive 1×(Momentum)
5.4 Theoretical Analysis: Additive Energy Equilibration
The empirical efficacy of ANDI stems from its ability to approximate the geometric benefits of ma-
trix balancing and spectral preconditioning without incurring theirO(n3) computational costs. In this
6
section, we analyze the algebraic properties of the equilibration operator Φ :Rm×n→Rm×n, defined
element-wise as:
Φ(G) ij=Gij
∥Gi,:∥2+∥G :,j∥2+ϵ.(15)
We establish that this operator acts as a conservative structural regularizer that mitigates the hubness
phenomenon and homogenizes the spectral landscape.
5.4.1 Majorization of Geometric Balancing
Standard matrix equilibration techniques, such as the Ruiz algorithm [11] or Sinkhorn-Knopp [13],
typically seek to normalize a matrixGvia diagonal scaling matricesD 1,D2. A single step of sym-
metric geometric balancing transforms an entryG ijby the geometric mean of its marginal norms:
Ggeo
ij=G ij(∥G i,:∥2∥G:,j∥2)−1/2.
ANDI employs an additive denominator. We show that this formulation imposes a strictly conserva-
tive trust region relative to geometric scaling.
Proposition 6(Conservative Regularization Bound).Letr i=∥G i,:∥2andc j=∥G :,j∥2. For any
entry with non-zero marginals, the update magnitude of ANDI is bounded by half the magnitude of the
geometric equilibration step.
Proof.By the Inequality of Arithmetic and Geometric Means (AM-GM), for real non-negativer i, cj:
ri+cj
2≥√ricj.(16)
Equality holds if and only ifr i=cj. Taking the reciprocal reverses the inequality:
1
ri+cj≤1
2√ricj.(17)
Multiplying both sides by the gradient magnitude|G ij|yields:
|Φ(G) ij| ≤1
2Gij√ricj=1
2|Ggeo
ij|.(18)
Remark 2.Implication for Non-Convex Optimization:The factor1
2acts as a geometric dampen-
ing coefficient on the local curvature. Crucially, this constant scaling is absorbed by the energy restoration
scalarα(Eq. 4) and does not suppress the global effective learning rate. Instead, it modifies the rel-
ative shape of the update: ANDI enforces a tighter local trust region specifically when row and column
norms are imbalanced (r i̸=cj), favoring stability over the aggressive orthogonalization typical of spectral
methods.
5.4.2 Asymptotic Suppression of Gradient Hubs
High-dimensional optimization is frequently degraded by theHubness Phenomenon[10], where specific
neurons (rows) or attention heads accumulate disproportionately high gradient norms. We prove that
ANDI asymptotically saturates the update norm for such outliers, effectively acting as a soft-clipping
mechanism.
Proposition 7(Asymptotic Row-Norm Saturation).Consider a gradient matrixGwhere a specific
rowkdominates the local geometry such thatr k→ ∞while column normsc jremain bounded by some
constantC. The Euclidean norm of the updated row vector bgk= Φ(G) k,:converges to unity from below.
Proof.Thej-th entry of the updated row is bGkj=Gkj
rk+cj. The squared Euclidean norm of the updated
row is:
∥bgk∥2
2=nX
j=1Gkj
rk+cj2
.(19)
In the limitr k→ ∞, the termc jin the denominator becomes negligible relative tor k:
lim
rk→∞∥bgk∥2
2= lim
rk→∞nX
j=1G2
kj
r2
k=1
r2
knX
j=1G2
kj.(20)
7
Substituting the definitionr2
k=Pn
j=1G2
kj, we obtain:
lim
rk→∞∥bgk∥2
2=r2
k
r2
k= 1.(21)
Sincec j≥0, the denominatorr k+cj≥rk, implying∥ bgk∥2≤1 for all finiter k, cj.
Remark 3.This property ensures that no single feature dimension can dominate the update step, strictly
preventing the ”exploding gradient” problem at the granularity of individual rows/columns. This provides
a theoretical justification for ANDI’s superior performance on Transformer architectures (Sec. 6), which
are sensitive to scale variations in residual streams.
5.4.3 Conditioning via Marginal Homogenization
While ANDI does not explicitly enforce orthogonality, it acts as a computationally efficient proxy for
spectral preconditioning by homogenizing the marginal distributions of the gradient matrix.
Van der Sluis [14] established that for any matrixA, minimizing the condition numberκ(D 1AD 2) is
closely related to balancing the row and column norms. Specifically, scaling a matrix such that all row
and column norms are equal brings the condition number within a factor of√nof the optimal diagonal
scaling.
ANDI penalizes entriesG ijwhere the aggregate marginalr i+cjis large. This operation inherently
reduces the variance between the effective row and column norms of the update bG. By driving the
optimization trajectory through a sequence of updates with homogenized marginals, ANDI implicitly
smooths the spectral condition number of the effective step, facilitating faster convergence along high-
curvature directions without theO(n3) cost of Singular Value Decomposition.
6 Experiments
To empirically validate the theoretical properties of ANDI, we evaluate the optimizer across four dis-
tinct modalities: non-convex dimensionality reduction (AUTOENCODER), computer vision (RESNET),
causal language modeling (GPT), and large-scale instruction fine-tuning (LLAMA).
6.1 Experimental Setup
Following the rigorous benchmarking protocols established by Semenov et al. [12], we compare ANDI
against two primary baselines:
1.AdamW[9]: The standard diagonal preconditioner. We utilize a Cosine learning rate schedule,
which is the community standard for coordinate-wise methods.
2.Dispersed Muon (D-Muon)[8, 12]: A state-of-the-art spectral optimizer. Unlike the origi-
nal Muon, D-Muon applies Newton-Schulz orthogonalization only to 2D tensors while using an
AdamW backend for vectors, alongside decoupled weight decay. We utilize the Warmup-Stable-
Decay (WSD) scheduler, as Muon-based methods have been shown to underperform with standard
cosine decay [12].
Methodology.Experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA GPU. We reportValidation
Lossas the primary metric to assess generalization. To quantify computational overhead, we report
Wall-Clock Time. Hyperparameters were tuned via grid search for ANDI and both baselines. Detailed
configurations are provided in Appendix A.
6.2 Task 1: Causal Language Modeling (GPT)
We train a NanoGPT transformer [15] on the TinyShakespeare corpus.
Results.As summarized in Table 2, ANDI (η= 0.09) achieves the best performance, reaching a
validation loss of1.535, strictly outperforming D-Muon (1.555) and AdamW (1.577). Computationally,
ANDI remains efficient. The total wall-clock time for ANDI (108s) is comparable to AdamW (103s),
whereas D-Muon incurs a∼23% overhead (127s) due to theO(N3) cost of Newton-Schulz iterations.
This suggests ANDI’s row-column normalization approximates the geometric benefits of spectral methods
for Attention layers without the cubic computational cost.
8
6.3 Task 2: High-Curvature Landscapes (AUTOENCODER)
We utilize a Deep Autoencoder on FashionMNIST. This task tests robustness in ill-conditioned land-
scapes.
Results.D-Muon achieves the lowest reconstruction error (0.011), confirming that exact orthogo-
nalization is highly effective for deep bottleneck architectures. However, ANDI (η= 0.09) demonstrates
superior robustness compared to diagonal methods, achieving a validation loss of 0.015 versus AdamW’s
0.019. While D-Muon wins on pure performance, ANDI bridges the gap between diagonal and spectral
methods, offering significantly better convergence than AdamW with lower computational cost than
Muon.
6.4 Task 3: Convolutional Generalization (RESNET)
We train a ResNet-9 on CIFAR-10 to evaluate performance on convolutional topologies.
Results.D-Muon dominates this task (Val Loss 0.277), followed by AdamW (0.338). ANDI trails
closely with a loss of 0.358.
Table 2:Benchmarking Summary.Best validation loss (lower is better) and total wall-clock time.
ANDI achieves SOTA performance on Transformers (GPT) with minimal overhead compared to AdamW.
GPT Autoencoder ResNet
Optimizer Val Loss Time (s) Val Loss Time (s) Val Loss Time (s)
AdamW 1.577103 0.019972 0.338245
D-Muon 1.555 127 0.011281 0.277321
ANDI (Ours) 1.535108 0.0156 74 0.358 255
6.5 Task 4: Instruction Fine-Tuning (LLAMA)
We fine-tune a quantized Llama-3 8B model [?] on the Alpaca-GPT4 dataset using Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [5] (r= 16, α= 16). This setting explicitly tests optimization in constrained, rectangular
subspaces (∆W∈Rd×r).
Results.Figure 2 demonstrates the ”Fast-Start” phenomenon of ANDI.
•Convergence Speed:ANDI (η= 5e-2) rapidly reduces loss, achieving a validation loss of∼1.6
within 60 steps. AdamW (η= 1e-3) stagnates early, remaining above 2.0 loss for the first 100
steps.
•Subspace Equilibration:While D-Muon (η= 0.02) performs well, it converges slower than
ANDI in the initial phase. We hypothesize that Muon’s strict orthogonality constraint is overly
restrictive for the rectangular geometry of LoRA adapters (4096×16). ANDI’s additive normal-
ization naturally balances the disparate scales of the high-dimension input and low-dimension rank
without forcing rotational invariance, leading to faster adaptation.
7 Discussion
The experimental results presented in Section 6 highlight distinct behaviors of ANDI relative to the
baselines. Here, we interpret these findings through the lens of our theoretical framework.
7.1 Inductive Bias in Transformers
The most significant result is the superior performance of ANDI on the GPT task (Figure 1, Left).
We hypothesize this is due to the specific structure of Transformer weights. In Self-Attention, rows
and columns correspond to specific embedding features or heads. If a specific feature dimension has
high variance, it dominates the LayerNorm statistics. AdamW exacerbates this by normalizing based on
historical variance, potentially stalling the learning of that feature. ANDI, utilizing instantaneous spatial
norms, enforces an equilibrium where all feature dimensions contribute more equally to the update step.
This aligns well with the ”feature competition” dynamic often observed in Transformer training [15].
9
Figure 1:Optimization Trajectories (Tasks 1-3).Training loss, Validation loss, and Gradient
Norm evolution. ANDI (Red) demonstrates superior convergence on GPT, outperforming both D-Muon
(Orange) and AdamW (Blue). On Autoencoder, ANDI significantly outperforms AdamW, bridging the
gap to the computationally expensive D-Muon.
Figure 2:Llama-3 8B Fine-Tuning (LoRA).Training (Left) and Validation (Right) loss. ANDI (Red)
dominates the optimization trajectory, exhibiting a ”fast-start” behavior that significantly outpaces
AdamW (Blue) and converges faster than D-Muon (Orange) in the low-rank regime.
ANDI slightly outperforms D-Muon on the GPT pre-training task (Figure 1, Left) and Llama-3 8B
fine-tuning (LoRA) task (Figure 2). D-Muon operates by orthogonalizing the gradient update, which
effectively equilibrates the spectrum of the weight update. ANDI achieves a similar effect through row-
10
column normalization. By dividingG ijby∥g i,:∥+∥g :,j∥, ANDI penalizes updates in directions where the
aggregate gradient mass is high. This creates a ”pseudo-whitening” effect. The first-order approximation
provided by ANDI captures the majority of the structural benefit at a fraction of the compute cost.
7.2 Stability vs. Aggressiveness
In the AUTOENCODER task, Muon exhibited rapid initial descent followed by stagnation. Spectral
methods are known to be ”aggressive”—they project gradients onto the Stiefel manifold, which can be
suboptimal in landscapes requiring fine-grained magnitude adjustments (like MSE loss). ANDI’s energy-
consistent scaling (Equation 4) allowed it to interpolate between the structural regime (early training)
and the magnitude-sensitive regime (fine-tuning), preventing the premature plateauing observed in D-
Muon.
7.3 Limitations
While ANDI achieves spectral efficiency, the current formulation entails specific structural constraints
and approximations:
1.Regime Heterogeneity:The proposed equilibration operator relies on the existence of orthogonal
tensor modes to estimate local curvature. For parameters with dimensiond <2 (biases, gains)
or matrices falling below the thresholdδ, ANDI reverts to global energy normalization. In this
regime, the algorithm approximates the dynamics ofNormalized Gradient Descent, foregoing the
element-wise equilibration benefits. Consequently, the structural advantages of ANDI are primarily
realized in ”wide” layers (Linear, Conv2d, Attention), while vector parameters do not benefit from
coordinate-aware preconditioning.
2.Spatial Homogenization via Matricization:For higher-order tensors, such as convolutional
kernelsK ∈RCout×Cin×H×W, ANDI applies a matricization step to reshape the tensor into
RCout×(CinHW). While this efficiently captures correlations between output filters, it treats spatial
dimensions and input channels uniformly. This approximation ignores the local inductive bias of
the convolution operator, potentially under-utilizing the specific spatial geometry of the kernel.
3.Discrete Structural Transition:A minimal dimensionalityδis required to compute statisti-
cally meaningful marginal norms. This imposes a discrete decision boundary where the optimizer
switches between coordinate-wise equilibration (for large matrices) and global spherical constraints
(for small tensors).
7.4 Broader Theoretical Implications: Additive Equilibration as a Primitive
While derived within the context of non-convex optimization, the core operator of ANDI—Rank-1 Ad-
ditive Equilibration—possesses algebraic properties that render it a tractable primitive for domains re-
quiring structural regularization. We define the general operator Φ(X) on a matrixX∈Rm×nwith row
normsrand column normscas:
Φ(X) ij=Xij
ri+cj+ϵ.(22)
We identify three regimes where this transformation offers a geometric advantage over standard baselines.
Batch-wise Density Normalization in Retrieval.In dense retrieval, theHubness Phenomenon[10]
degrades performance when high-density vectors (”hubs”) appear as nearest neighbors to a dispropor-
tionately large number of queries. Standard cosine similarity normalization fails to account for global
density variations. Consider a batch similarity matrixS∈RB×NwhereB >1. The column norm∥S :,j∥2
serves as a local proxy for the density of thej-th database item relative to the query batch. Applying
ANDI yields a re-scored matrix bS:
bSij=Sij
∥Si,:∥2+∥S :,j∥2.(23)
By explicitly incorporating the column energy, ANDI penalizes ”hub” items that possess high aggregate
similarity across the batch. Unlike CSLS [1], which requires expensive k-NN search for density estima-
tion, ANDI achieves structural suppression inO(BN) (linear in the similarity matrix size), efficiently
sharpening the retrieval distribution around semantically unique correspondences.
11
Soft Redundancy Suppression in Representation Learning.Standard objectives for feature
decorrelation (e.g., in self-supervised learning) often rely on Pearson correlation, which normalizes co-
variance entries via the geometric mean of variances:ρ ij=C ij/p
CiiCjj. ANDI implies a stricter
regularization scheme. By the AM-GM inequality, the arithmetic mean of structural norms dominates
the geometric mean:r i+cj≥2√ricj. When applied to a feature covariance matrixC, ANDI acts as a
Soft Redundancy Suppressionoperator. Because the row normr i=∥C i,:∥2captures the total correlation
energy of featureiwith all other dimensions (not just its own variance), ANDI naturally down-weights
features that are redundant (i.e., highly correlated with the global set). This serves as anO(N2) proxy
for feature selection, discouraging representational collapse without the computational cost of whitening
(ZCA).
One-Shot Structural Balancing for Graph Matching.The Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithm [2] solves
entropic optimal transport by iteratively projecting a matrix onto the Birkhoff polytope (doubly stochas-
tic matrices). ANDI functions as a closed-form, one-shot approximation of this balancing objective.
While it does not enforce strict mass conservation (PP= 1), it enforces element-wise boundedness
(as proven in Proposition 2). In Deep Graph Matching, where the goal is robust node correspondence,
the raw similarity matrix is often dominated by outliers. ANDI equilibrates the energy distribution
of the matrix, mapping values to a bounded range while penalizing nodes with disproportionately high
matching degrees. This provides a conditioned initialization for matching layers, capturing the structural
benefits of Sinkhorn scaling without the latency of iterative solvers.
8 Conclusion
We presented ANDI, an algorithm designed to democratize efficient optimization in deep learning. By
replacing expensive spectral decompositions with row-column additive normalization, ANDI successfully
navigates the trade-off between computational efficiency and geometric awareness.
Our theoretical analysis confirmed that ANDI preserves descent directions and bounds update mag-
nitudes, ensuring robust stability. Empirically, ANDI demonstrated state-of-the-art convergence rates on
non-convex vision and language modeling benchmarks, proving particularly effective for Transformers.
These results suggest that the heavy machinery of second-order or spectral optimization is not always
necessary; simple, algebraically sound equilibration of gradient matrices can yield equivalent gains with
the efficiency of standard first-order methods. Future work will investigate the application of ANDI
to distributed training setups, where its low memory footprint and lack of collective communication
overheads could offer significant wall-clock speedups.
A Experimental Methodology and Implementation Details
To ensure a rigorous evaluation of the ANDI optimizer, we aligned our experimental protocol with the
comprehensive benchmarking standards recently established by Semenov et al. [12]. Their work high-
lights critical flaws in common optimizer comparisons—specifically regarding weight decay application
in spectral methods and the coupling of learning rate schedules to specific optimizer families. Below, we
detail how these recommendations were translated into our implementation.
A.1 Optimizer Selection: Dispersed Muon (D-Muon)
For the spectral baseline, we utilize theDispersed Muon (D-Muon)algorithm rather than the original
Muon implementation.
•Rationale:As demonstrated in Section A.3 and Figures 4 & 8 of [12], the original Muon optimizer
suffers in extended training regimes because it fails to apply weight decay to 2D matrix parameters.
D-Muon corrects this by applying decoupled weight decay to all parameter groups prior to the
update step.
•Implementation:Our code applies Newton-Schulz orthogonalization only to tensors with dimen-
sions>32×32 (Linear and Conv2d layers), falling back to an AdamW-style backend for vector
parameters (biases, normalization scales). This hybrid approach is consistent with the ”Dispersed”
methodology required to maintain stability (Takeaway 3 in [12]).
12
•Newton-Schulz Iterations:We fix the number of orthogonalization steps atN NS= 5. Semenov
et al. (Figure 37) show that increasing iterations beyond 5 yields diminishing returns in convergence
while incurring unnecessary wall-clock overhead.
•Momentum:We utilize momentum withβ= 0.95. Extensive hyperparameter tuning on Llama
architectures (Tables 40-41 in [12]) identifies 0.95 as consistently superior to the standard 0.9 or
0.99 for Muon-based methods.
A.2 Learning Rate Schedulers
We strictly adhere to the finding that different optimizer classes require distinct learning rate schedules
to achieve optimal performance (Takeaway 6 in [12]).
•Coordinate-wise Methods (AdamW):We utilize aCosine Decayschedule. Benchmarks
(Figure 11c [12]) show that AdamW consistently outperforms other schedules (linear or WSD)
under cosine decay.
•Spectral Methods (D-Muon) and ANDI:We utilize aWarmup-Stable-Decay (WSD)
schedule. Semenov et al. demonstrate that spectral methods exhibit a unique preference for WSD
(Figure 11a), often plateauing early with standard cosine annealing. Consequently, using Cosine for
AdamW and WSD for ANDI/D-Muon represents the fairest comparison, allowing each optimizer
to operate under its ideal conditions.
A.3 Evaluation Metrics
Validation Loss vs. Training Loss.Following the reporting standards urged in [12] (Figure 1 &
Takeaway 12), we reportFinal Validation Lossas the primary metric. Training loss is frequently
misleading in optimizer benchmarks due to varying degrees of overfitting and regularization handling
(e.g., weight decay impacts training loss values differently across optimizers).
Wall-Clock Time.Step count is an insufficient metric for spectral methods due to the computational
overhead of matrix operations. As noted in Appendix D.3 and Figure 18 of [12], methods like SOAP or
Muon can suffer from slowdowns as model size increases. We report total wall-clock time to quantify the
trade-off between convergence speed (per step) and computational throughput.
A.4 Hyperparameter Search and Configuration
While we adopt the architectural hyperparameters suggested by the references, we performed an inde-
pendent robust search for learning rates to accommodate the specific scale of our proxy tasks.
•Search Space:We performed a logarithmic grid search for learning rates:η∈ {1e-3, . . . ,2e-4}
for AdamW andη∈ {0.09, . . . ,0.009}for ANDI and D-Muon.
•Weight Decay:Fixed atλ= 0.01 for all methods. While Semenov et al. explore values up to
0.1, we selected 0.01 to ensure consistent regularization strength across the diverse architectures
(ResNet vs. Transformer) in our suite.
•Gradient Clipping:
–Tasks 1-3 (Proxy Benchmarks):We monitored gradient norms but did not enforce clipping
(infinite threshold) to observe the raw optimization trajectory and stability of the updates.
–Task 4 (LLAMA Fine-tuning):We applied standard gradient clipping (norm 1.0) via the
Unsloth framework [4]. This aligns with findings (Takeaway 17 in [12]) that clipping is crucial
for stability in lower-precision (4-bit/bfloat16) regimes involving large rectangular matrices.
A.5 Hardware and Environment
All benchmarks were executed on a single NVIDIA Tesla T4 (16GB) available in the free tier of Google
Colab. The Llama-3 fine-tuning was performed using 4-bit quantization via the Unsloth framework to
fit within memory constraints. Seeds 42 and 1337 were used for reproducibility.
13
References
[1] Alexis Conneau, Guillaume Lample, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Ludovic Denoyer, and Herv’e J’egou.
Word translation without parallel data.ArXiv, abs/1710.04087, 2017.
[2] Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. InNeural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, 2013.
[3] Vineet Gupta, Tomer Koren, and Yoram Singer. Shampoo: Preconditioned stochastic tensor opti-
mization. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
[4] Daniel Han and Unsloth Team. Unsloth.https://github.com/unslothai/unsloth, 2023. Ac-
cessed: 2025.
[5] J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu
Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.ArXiv, abs/2106.09685, 2021.
[6] Keller Jordan, Yuchen Jin, Vlado Boza, You Jiacheng, Franz Cesista, Laker Newhouse, and Jeremy
Bernstein. Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks, 2024.
[7] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.CoRR,
abs/1412.6980, 2014.
[8] Jingyuan Liu, Jianling Su, Xingcheng Yao, Zhejun Jiang, Guokun Lai, Yulun Du, Yidao Qin,
Weixin Xu, Enzhe Lu, Junjie Yan, Yanru Chen, Huabin Zheng, Yibo Liu, Shaowei Liu, Bohong
Yin, Weiran He, Han Zhu, Yuzhi Wang, Jianzhou Wang, Meng Dong, Zheng Zhang, Yongsheng
Kang, Hao Zhang, Xinran Xu, Yutao Zhang, Yuxin Wu, Xinyu Zhou, and Zhilin Yang. Muon is
scalable for llm training, 2025.
[9] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. InInternational Confer-
ence on Learning Representations, 2017.
[10] Miloˇ s Radovanovi´ c, Alexandros Nanopoulos, and Mirjana Ivanovi´ c. Hubs in space: Popular nearest
neighbors in high-dimensional data.J. Mach. Learn. Res., 11:2487–2531, 2010.
[11] Daniel Ruiz. A scaling algorithm to equilibrate both row and column norms in matrices. Technical
Report RAL-TR-2001-034, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Oxon, UK, 2001.
[12] Andrei Semenov, Matteo Pagliardini, and Martin Jaggi. Benchmarking optimizers for large language
model pretraining.ArXiv, abs/2509.01440, 2025.
[13] Richard Sinkhorn. A relationship between arbitrary positive matrices and doubly stochastic matri-
ces.Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 35:876–879, 1964.
[14] A. van der Sluis. Condition numbers and equilibration of matrices.Numerische Mathematik,
14(1):14–23, 1969.
[15] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. InNeural Information Processing
Systems, 2017.
14